# Project 4 : Data Lake

## Overview

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

The goal of this project is to build an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables for the analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs the users are listening to. The Spark process will be deployed on a cluster using AWS.

## Dataset
There are two datasets that reside in S3.

   Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
   Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`
    

### 1. Song dataset
Song dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Datase](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/).
Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.

File path examples:
`song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`


Sample data in a single file:
```
{
"num_songs": 1, 
"artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", 
"artist_latitude": null, 
"artist_longitude": null, 
"artist_location": "", 
"artist_name": "Line Renaud", 
"song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", 
"title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", 
"duration": 152.92036, 
"year": 0
}
```

### 2. Log dataset
Log dataset consists of log files generated by [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the song dataset.
The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month.

Filepaths of two files in this dataset:

`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json`


Sample data:
```
{
"artist": "Survivor", 
"auth": "Logged In", 
"firstName": "Jayden", 
"gender": "M", 
"itemInSession": 0, 
"lastName": "Fox", 
"length": 245.36771, 
"level": "free", 
"location": "New Orleans-Metairie, LA", 
"method": "PUT",
"page": "NextSong", 
"registration": 1541033612796, 
"sessionId": 100, 
"song": "Eye Of The Tiger", 
"status": 200, 
"ts": 1541110994796, 
"userAgent": "\"Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.3; WOW64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/36.0.1985.143 Safari/537.36\"", 
"userId": "101"
}
```


## Database Schema Design
A star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis is created by using the below tables.

### Fact tables
**songplays** : Records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
> songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension tables
**users** : users in the app
> user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

**songs** : songs in music database
> song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

**artists** : artists in music database
> artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude

**time** : timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
> start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


## Project Files

`etl.py` : Extracts data from S3, processes the data using Spark and loads them back to S3. 

`README.md` : Markdown file that gives a summary of the project.

`dl.cfg` : Configuration file that contains information about AWS credentials.


## Execution Instructions

1. Input the AWS credential details in the `dl.cfg` file.
2. Execute `etl.py` to extract and load the data to the tables.
